create guidelines to create a plugin (#118)
massalabs/docs: docs/build/plugin/guidelines.mdx

---
id: guidelines
title: Guidelines
---

# Plugin creation guidelines

One of the advantages of Massa Station is that plugins can be developed in any programming language. But in order for modules to work on the Massa Station, they must first respect a certain number of guidelines.

> In the context of Massa Station, the terms "plugin" and "module" are used interchangeably to refer to the same thing, which is an extension or additional functionality that can be developed to work with Massa Station.

## Tech Stack

You can develop a plugin in any wanted language. The easiest way is to use Go.

### Develop a plugin in Go

You can follow the steps described [here](./createplugin.mdx)

### Develop a plugin in any other language

Your plugin will need to call **the Register Endpoint** to be compatible with Massa Station: The plugin should be able to call the `/plugin-manager/register` endpoint of Massastation, as defined in [MassaStation Swagger File](https://github.com/massalabs/station/blob/v0.2.5/api/swagger/server/restapi/resource/swagger.yml#L481).

## Artifact requirements

> To be compatible with Massa Station, the plugin zip archive must contain the following files :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be compatible with Massa Station, the plugin zip archive must contain the following files:
```

### Logo

There must be a plugin logo in the zip archive. it must be a [valid image file](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Media/Formats/Image_types)

### Module manifest

> The manifest will provide the necessary information to the Massa Station to display the plugin in the UI. It must be a `manifest.json` file at the root of the artifact. It must contain the following properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The manifest will provide the necessary information to the Massa Station to display the plugin in the UI. It must be a `manifest.json` file at the root of the zip archive. It must contain the following properties:
```

---
id: guidelines
title: Guidelines
---

# Plugin creation guidelines

One of the advantages of Massa Station is that plugins can be developed in any programming language. But in order for modules to work on the Massa Station, they must first respect a certain number of guidelines.

## Tech Stack

You can developp a plugin in any wanted language. The easiest way is to use go with the the [plugin hello-world](https://github.com/massalabs/station-massa-hello-world) hook to register the plugin.

### Develop a plugin in go

To do so once you created a new plugin, you can simply register the plugin using our [plugin package](https://github.com/massalabs/station-massa-hello-world/blob/main/pkg/plugin/register.go)

### Develop a plugin in any other language

> Your plugin will need to call **the Register Endpoint** to be compatible with Massa Station: The plugin should be able to call the `/plugin-manager/register` endpoint of Massastation, as defined in [MassaStation Swagger File](https://github.com/massalabs/station/blob/main/api/swagger/server/restapi/resource/swagger.yml).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your plugin will need to call **the Register Endpoint** to be compatible with Massa Station: The plugin should be able to call the `/plugin-manager/register` endpoint of Massastation, as defined in [MassaStation Swagger File](https://github.com/massalabs/station/blob/main/api/swagger/server/restapi/resource/swagger.yml#L481).
```

Reviewer: you are right, then we should put this link: https://github.com/massalabs/station/blob/v0.2.5/api/swagger/server/restapi/resource/swagger.yml#L481

with the tag and the line, this can't change.

Reviewer 2: But that means we will need to update it when we do a new version
Otherwise we redirect people to an older version of the spec

Reviewer: true but the question is: what is worse between redirect to incorrect line in the file or old spec?

Reviewer 2: I guess we just need to make sure that if we modify the endpoint, we reflect the changes in this doc (and so, update the URL)

Author: sounds good, I'll use it

In other words, the plugin should be able to call the following endpoint :

- **Endpoint:** `/plugin-manager/register`
- **Method:** POST
- **Parameters:**
  - `body` (Request Body, required): The request body containing the following properties:
    - `id` (string, required): Plugin identifier.

>     - `url` (string, required): URL authority to use for connecting to the plugin.

Reviewer: we should apply DRY (don't repeat yourself) the source of truth is on the link to the swagger file just above

## Artifact requirements

To be compatible with Massa Station, the plugin artifact must contain the following files :

### Logo

> There must be a plugin logo in the artifact. it must be a [valid image file](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Media/Formats/Image_types)

Reviewer: word artifact is not accurate. We talk about artifact of a github action job. We talk about assets of a release. we provide to the plugin manager a zip archive.

```suggestion
There must be a plugin logo in the zip archive. it must be a [valid image file](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Media/Formats/Image_types)
```

### Module manifest

> The manifest will provide the necessary information to the Massa Station to display the plugin in the UI. It must be a `manifest.json` file at the root of the artifact. It must contain the following properties :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The manifest will provide the necessary information to the Massa Station to display the plugin in the UI. It must be a `manifest.json` file at the root of the artifact. It must contain the following properties:
```

For detailed steps on creating a plugin, please refer to the [create plugin guide](/docs/build/plugin/create-plugin).

## Plugin binary specifications

When Massa Station starts a plugin, it generates a unique ID for the plugin and passes it as a parameter to the plugin binary. Once the plugin is started, it must register itself on Massa Station to confirm its startup.

Plugins are started as follows:

```bash
./plugin-binary <PLUGIN-ID>
```
At startup, the plugin must retrieve the plugin ID from the command line arguments.
Following the startup, the plugin must register itself by calling the `/plugin-manager/register` endpoint of Massa Station, providing the assigned ID.
> Massa Station will respond with a 204 status code if the registration is successful. In case of failure, the plugin must exit with a non-zero exit code.
## Plugin Packaging

> To be installed in Massa Station, a plugin must be packaged" as a Zip Archive, tailored for each targeted operating system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be installed in Massa Station, a plugin must be packaged as a Zip Archive, tailored for each targeted operating system.
```

### Supported OS Configurations

Currently, Massa Station supports the following OS configurations:

- Windows 10/11, AMD64
- Linux, AMD64
- macOS, AMD64
- macOS, ARM64

<!-- to do : add more details about the supported os in another page
For details on the supported OS configurations, refer to [the Massa Station documentation](../wallet/massa-station.mdx).

> -->

Reviewer: todo here, I would do it now or open an issue to not lost the idea.

Author: issue for massastation doc: https://github.com/massalabs/docu-dev/issues/129

---
id: guidelines
title: Guidelines
---

# Plugin creation guidelines

One of the advantages of Massa Station is that plugins can be developed in any programming language. But in order for modules to work on the Massa Station, they must first respect a certain number of guidelines.

## Tech Stack

> You can developp a plugin in any wanted language. The easiest way is to use go with the the [plugin hello-world](https://github.com/massalabs/station-massa-hello-world) hook to register the plugin.

Reviewer: I think we need the link to https://github.com/massalabs/station-massa-hello-world anywhere in this doc.

### Develop a plugin in go

To do so once you created a new plugin, you can add the following code to your main.go file to register the plugin to the Massa Station:

```go
	listener, err := server.HTTPListener()
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}

	plugin.RegisterPlugin(listener)
```

### Develop a plugin in any other language

> Your plugin will need to call **the Register Endpoint** to be compatible with Massa Station: The plugin should be able to call the `register` endpoint in Massastation defined [here](https://github.com/massalabs/station/blob/v0.2.5/api/swagger/server/restapi/resource/swagger.yml#L481C28-L481C28).

Author: change applied

In other words, the plugin should be able to call the following endpoint :

- **Endpoint:** `/plugin-manager/register`
- **Method:** POST
- **Description:** Register a plugin. Used by plugins to register themselves to the plugin manager.

> - **Operation ID:** `pluginManagerRegister`

Reviewer 2: I think those are useless since we are explaining it before and the OperationID is specific to the Go Code inside MassaStation

- **Parameters:**
  - `body` (Request Body, required): The request body containing the following properties:
    - `id` (string, required): Plugin identifier.
    - `url` (string, required): URL authority to use for connecting to the plugin.

> ## Artifact requirements
> 
> To be compatible with Massa Station, the plugin artifact must contain the following files :

Reviewer 2: I don't really undestand why you are talking about "artifact" here. I guess you are talking about the archive, for example that we store in the Github Releases

```suggestion
## Artifact requirements

To be compatible with Massa Station, the plugin zip archive must contain the following files :
```

### Logo

There must be a plugin logo in the artifact. it must be a [valid image file](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Media/Formats/Image_types)

### Module manifest

The manifest will provide the necessary information to the Massa Station to display the plugin in the UI. It must be a `manifest.json` file at the root of the artifact. It must contain the following properties :

| Fields      | Description                   | Format | Specifications    |
| ----------- | ----------------------------- | ------ | ----------------- |
| Author      | Module author name            | text   | 30 characters max |
| Name        | Module name                   | text   | 30 characters max |
| Description | Module short description text | text   | 80 characters max |

> | Logo        | Module logo file name         | text   | 40px x 40px max   |

Author: I'll remove the image size - this constraint is only for the store.
I gave the constraints [here](https://github.com/massalabs/docu-dev/blob/ed8665b37e1224e44b1381712594d60ec5153b3a/docs/build/plugin/guidelines.mdx#L46-L47) do you think I should mention it again ?

> | Logo        | Module logo file name         | text   | 40px x 40px max   |

Author: it works

| Home        | URL to module home page       | URL    | N/A               |

> | Version     | Module version                | semver | XX.XX.XX          |

Reviewer 2: I understand what is "semver" because I know it, but it's not an http format. So in my opinion, we should change it as: 
```suggestion
| Version     | Module version                | text | Using [Semantic Versioning 2.0](https://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0) |
```

Please check that it is possible to render links in a table like. Otherwise, we can move the link to a comment under the table

| APIspec     | api specifications            | text   | N/A               |

> example :
>
> ```json
> {
>   "author": "Massa Labs",
>   "name": "hello-world",
>   "description": "hello world plugin",
>   "logo": "hello_world.svg",
>   "home": "",
>   "version": "0.0.6",
>   "apispec": ""
> }

> > ```

Reviewer 2: I think I heard that it is possible to import code from URLs, could we use the `Manifest.json` from the hello world plugin directly? So we could visualize it here and add a link to it if people wants to see it "in action".

Author: I just tried to do that. It works in a readme file but not here. I can continue to try to find something

Reviewer: I think it's ok, you can add bellow:

"See the manifest of the Hello-World plugin as an example: https://github.com/massalabs/station-massa-hello-world/blob/v0.0.8/manifest.json"

---
id: guidelines
title: Guidelines
---

# Plugin Creation Guidelines

One of the advantages of Massa Station is its flexibility in allowing plugins to be developed in any programming language. In order for modules to work with Massa Station, they must adhere to specific guidelines and specifications.

## Plugin Overview

Massa Station plugins are essentially binaries with a few specific requirements, as defined in this document.

Since Massa Station plugins are binaries, developers have the freedom to use their preferred programming language to create plugins that work seamlessly with Massa Station. Most of our Massa Station products and documentation are using Go because it's the language we use internally. However, we encourage developers to use any language they prefer.

For detailed steps on creating a plugin, please refer to the [create plugin guide](/docs/build/plugin/create-plugin).

## Plugin binary specifications

> When Massa Station starts a plugin, it generates a unique ID for the plugin and passes it as a parameter to the plugin binary. Once the plugin is started, it must register itself on Massa Station to confirm its startup.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When Massa Station starts a plugin, it generates a unique ID for the plugin and passes it as a parameter to the plugin binary. Once the plugin has started, it must register itself to Massa Station to confirm that it is running properly.
```
Feel free to rephrase a bit.
